candidates will oblige by keeping their
answers concise and onpoint
each candidate has as much as two
minutes to respond to a common question
and there will be a two-minute follow-up
the audience here in the hall has agreed
to be polite and attentive no cheering
or booing or outbursts of any sort we
will set aside that agreement just this
once to welcome president barack obama
and governor mitt romney
gentlemen thank you both for joining us
here tonight we have a lot of folks have
been waiting all day to talk to you so i
want to get right to it
governor romney as you know you won the
coin toss so the first question will go
to you and i want to turn to a
first-time voter jeremy epstein who has
a question for you mr president
governor romney as a twenty-year-old
college student all i hear from
professors neighbors and others is that
when i graduate i would have little
chance to get employment can what can
you say to reassure me but more
importantly my parents that i'll be able
to sufficiently support myself after i
graduate thank you jeremy i appreciate
your your question and thank you for
being here this evening and to all of
those from nassau county here that have
come thank you for your time thank you
to hofstra university and to candy
crowley for organizing and leading this
this event thank you mr president also
for being part of this this debate yours
question your question is one that's
being asked by college kids all over
this country as in pennsylvania with
someone who just graduated this was in
philadelphia and she said i've got my
degree i can't find a job i've got three
part-time jobs they're just barely
enough to pay for my food and pay for an
apartment i can't begin to pay back my
student loans so we have to do is two
things we have to make sure that we make
it easier for kids to afford college and
also make sure that when they get out of
college there's a job when i was
governor of massachusetts to get a high
school degree you had to pass an exam if
you graduated in the top quarter of your
class we gave you a john and abigail out
of scholarship four years tuition free
to the college of your choice in
massachusetts it's a public institution
i want to make sure we keep our pilgrim
pell grant program growing we're also
going to have our loan program so that
people are able to afford school but the
key thing is to make sure you can get a
job when you get out of school and
what's happened over the last four years
has been very very hard for america's
young people i want you to be able to
get a job i know what it takes to get
this economy going
with half of college kids graduating
this year without a college trip without
a job and without a college-level job
that's just unacceptable
and likewise you've got more and more
debt in your back so more debt and less
jobs i'm going to change that
i know what it takes to create good jobs
again i know what it takes to make sure
that you have the kind of opportunity
you deserve and kids across this country
are gonna recognize we're bringing back
an economy it's not going to be like the
last four years the middle class has
been crushed over the last four years
and jobs have been too scarce i know
what it takes to bring them back and i'm
going to do that make sure when you
graduate when do you graduate 2014 when
you come out in 2014 i presume i'm going
to be president i'm gonna make sure you
get a job thanks jeremy yeah you bet
jeremy first of all your future is
bright and the fact that you're making
an investment in higher education is
critical not just to you but to the
entire nation now the most important
thing we can do is to make sure that we
are creating jobs in this country but
not just jobs good-paying jobs ones that
can support a family and what i want to
do is build on the five million jobs
that we've created over the last 30
months in the private sector alone and
they're a bunch of things that we can do
to make sure your future is bright
number one i want to build manufacturing
jobs in this country again now when
governor romney said we should let
detroit go bankrupt i said we're gonna
bet on american workers in american auto
industry and it's come surging back i
want to do that in industries not just
in detroit but all across the country
and that means we change our tax code so
we're giving incentives to companies
that are investing here in the united
states and creating jobs here it also
means we're helping them and small
businesses to export all around the
world in new markets number two we've
got to make sure that we have the best
education system in the world and the
fact that you're going to college is
great but i want everybody to get a
great education and we've worked hard to
make sure that student loans are
available for folks like you but i also
want to make sure that community
colleges are offering slots for workers
to get retrained for the jobs that are
out there right now in the jobs of the
future number three we've got to control
our own energy you know not only oil and
natural gas which we've been investing
in but also we've got to make sure we're
building the energy source of the future
not just thinking about next year but
ten years from now twenty
years from now that's why we invest in
solar and wind and biofuels
energy-efficient cars we've got to
reduce our deficit but we got to do it
in a balanced way asking the wealthy to
pay a little bit more along with cuts so
that we can invest in education like
yours and let's take the money that
we've been spending on war over the last
decade to rebuild america roads bridges
schools we do those things not only is
your future gonna be bright but
america's future is gonna be bright as
well let me ask you for a more immediate
answer at beginning mr romney just
quickly well what can you do we're
looking at a situation where 40 of the
unemployed have been unemployed for six
months or more they don't have the two
years that jeremy has what about those
long-term unemployed who need a job
right now well what you're saying in
this country is 23 million people
struggling to find a job and a lot of
them as you say candy have been out of
work for a long long long time the
president's policies have been exercised
over the last four years and they
haven't put americans back to work we
have fewer people working today that we
had when the president took office if
the unemployment rate was 7.8 percent
when he took office its 7.8 percent now
but if you calculated that unemployment
rate taking back the people who dropped
out of the workforce it would be 10
point 7 percent we have not made the
progress we need to make to put people
back to work that's why i put it a
five-point plan that gets america twelve
million new jobs in four years and
rising take-home pay it's gonna help
jeremy get a job when he comes out of
school it's gonna help people across the
country that are unemployed right now
and one thing that the the president
said which i want to make sure that we
understand he said that i said we should
take detroit bankrupt and that's right
my plan was to have the company go
through bankruptcy like 7-eleven did at
macy's and and at cottonelle airlines
and come out stronger and i know he
keeps saying you wanted to take detroit
bankrupt well the president took detroit
bankrupt you took general motors
bankrupt you took chrysler bankrupt
so when you say that i wanted to take
the auto industry bankrupt you actually
did and and i think it's important to
know that that was a process that was
necessary to get the
those companies back on their feet so
they could start hiring more people that
was precisely what i recommended and
ultimately what happened let me let me
give the president a chance go ahead
what governor romney said just isn't
true he wanted to take them into
bankruptcy without providing them any
way to stay open and we would have lost
a million jobs and that don't take my
word for it ticked the executives at gm
and chrysler some of whom were
republicans may even support governor
romney but they'll tell you his
prescription wasn't gonna work and
gunnar romney says he's got a five-point
governor romney doesn't have a
five-point plan he has a one-point plan
and that plan is to make sure that folks
at the top played by a different set of
that's been his philosophy in the
private sector that's been his
philosophy as governor that's been his
philosophy as a presidential candidate
you can make a lot of money and pay
lower tax rates than somebody who makes
a lot less you can ship jobs overseas
and get tax breaks for it you can invest
in a company bankrupt it lay off the
workers strip away their pensions and
you still make money that's exactly the
philosophy that we've seen in place for
the last decade
that's what's been squeezing
middle-class families and we have fought
back for four years to get out of that
mess the last thing we need to do is to
go back to the very same policies that
got us there mr president next question
is gonna be for you here in mr romney
governor romney there'll be plenty of
chances here to go on but i want it's
right to at detroit answer and the rest
of the answer way off the mark okay well
yeah well you certainly will have lots
of time here coming up because i want to
move you on to something that sort of
connected to cars here and and go over
and we want to get a question from
filter cola
you're energy secretary steven chu has
now been on record three times stating
it's not policy of his department to
help lower gas prices do you agree with
secretary chu that this is not the job
of the energy department the most
important thing we can do is to make
sure we control our own energy so here's
what i've done since i've been president
we have increased oil production to the
highest levels in 16 years natural gas
production is the highest it's been in
decades we have seen increases in coal
production and coal employment but what
i've also said is we can't just produce
traditional source of energy we've also
got to look to the future that's why we
doubled fuel efficiency standards on
cars that means that in the middle of
the next decade any car you buy you're
gonna end up going twice as far on a
gallon of gas that's why we've doubled
clean energy production like wind and
solar and biofuels and all these things
have contributed to us lowering our oil
imports to the lowest levels in 16 years
now i want to build on that and that
means yes we still continue to open up
new areas for drilling we continue to
make it a priority for us to go after
natural gas we've got potentially
600,000 jobs and a hundred years worth
of energy right beneath our feet with
natural gas and we can do it an
environmentally sound way but we've also
got to continue to figure out how we
have efficient energy because ultimately
that's how we're gonna reduce demand and
that's what's going to keep gas prices
lower now governor romney will say he's
got an all-of-the-above plan but
basically his plan is to let the oil
companies write the energy policies so
he's got the oil and gas part but he
doesn't have the clean energy part and
if we are only thinking about tomorrow
or the next day and not thinking about
10 years from now
we're not going to control our own
economic future because china germany
there make
these investments and i'm not gonna seed
those jobs of the future to those
countries i expect those new energy
sources to be built right here in the
united states that's going to help
jeremy get a job it's also going to make
sure that you're not paying as much for
gas governor on the subject of gas
prices well let's look at the
president's policies all right as
opposed to the rhetoric because we've
had four years of policies being played
out and the president's right in terms
of the additional oil production but
none of it came on federal land as a
matter of fact oil production is down
fourteen percent this year on federal
land and gas production is down nine
percent why because the president cut in
half the number of licenses and permits
for drilling on federal lands and in
federal waters so where'd the increase
come from well a lot of it came from the
bakken range in north dakota
what was his participation there the
administration brought a criminal action
against the people drilling up there for
oil this massive new resource we have
and what was the cause a twenty or
twenty five birds were killed and they
brought out a migratory bird act to go
after the amount of criminal bases look
i want to make sure we use our oil our
coal our gas our nuclear our renewables
i believe very much in our renewable
capabilities ethanol wind solar will be
an important part of our energy mix but
what we don't need is to have the
president keeping us from taking
advantage of oil coal and gas this has
not been mr oil or mr gas or mr kaul
talk to the people that are working in
those industries i was at in coal
country people grabbed my arms and say
please save my job the head of the epa
said you can't build a coal plant you'll
virtually it's virtually impossible
given our regulations when the president
ran for office he said if you built a
coal plant you can go ahead but you'll
go bankrupt that's not the right course
for america let's take advantage of the
energy resources we have as well as the
energy sources for the future and if we
do that if we do what i'm planning on
doing which is getting us energy
independent for north america energy
independence within eight years you're
gonna see manufacturing jobs come back
because our energy is low cost
they're already beginning to come back
because of our abundant energy
i'll get america and north america
energy independent i'll do it by more
drilling more permits and licenses we're
going to bring that pipeline in from
canada how in the world the president
said no to that pipeline i will never
know this is about bringing good jobs
back for the middle class of america and
that's what i'm gonna do mr president
let me just see if i can move you to the
gist of this question which is are we
looking at the new normal i can tell you
that tomorrow morning a lot of people
who have said will wake up and fill up
and they will find out the price of gas
is over $4 a gallon is it with within
the purview of the government to bring
those prices down or are we looking at
the new normal candy there's no doubt
that world demands gone up but our
production is going up and we're using
oil more efficiently and very little of
what governor romney just said is true
we've opened up public lands we're
actually drilling more on public lands
than in the previous administration and
my the previous president was an oil man
and natural gas isn't just appearing
magically we're encouraging it and
working with the industry and when i
hear governor romney say he's a big coal
guy and keep in mind when governor when
you were man governor of massachusetts
you stood in front of a coal plant and
pointed at it and said this plant kills
and took great pride in shutting it down
and now suddenly you're a big champion
of coal so what i've tried to do is be
consistent with respect to something
like coal we made the largest investment
in clean coal technology to make sure
that even as we're producing more coal
we're producing it cleaner and smarter
same thing with oil same thing with
natural gas and the proof is our oil
imports are down to the lowest levels in
20 years
oral production is up natural gas
production is up and most importantly
we're also starting to build cars that
are more efficient and that's creating
jobs that means those cars can be
exported because that's the demand
around the world and it also means that
it'll save money in your pocketbook
that's the strategy you need an
all-of-the-above strategy and that's
what we're gonna do in the next
for years but that's not what you've
done in the last four years that's the
problem in the last four years you cut
permits and licenses on federal land in
federal waters in half not true governor
romney so how much did you cut about
through by how much did you cut them by
then-governor we have actually produced
more oil you know how much did you cut
licenses and permits on federal land in
federal waters governor romney here's
what we did
there were a whole bunch of oil i don't
have quite a question and the question
was how much did you cut the mommy to
answer did you cut the back i'm happy to
answer the question all right and it is
here's what happened
you had up a whole bunch of oil
companies who had leases on public lands
that they weren't using so what we said
was you can't just sit on this for 10 20
30 years decide when you want to drill
when you want to produce when it's most
profitable for you these are public
lands so if you want to drill on public
lands you use it or you lose it okay now
and so what we did was take away those
leases and we are now real etting them
so that we can actually make a reduction
and production on private on government
land is down no to production a
government land of oil is down 14
government and production is not 9 it's
just not true it's absolutely true look
there's no question but the people
recognize that we have not produced more
working gas on federal lands and in
federal waters and coal coal production
is not up called jobs are not up i was
just at a coal facility word some 1,200
people lost their jobs the right course
for america is to have a true
all-of-the-above policy i don't think
anyone really believes that you're a
person who's gonna be pushing for oil
and gas and coal you'll get your chance
in a moment i'm still speaking but and
the answer is i don't believe people
think that's the case because i that
wasn't a question okay that was a
statement i don't think the american
people believe that i will fight for all
coal and natural gas
and the proof the proof of whether
strategy is working or not is what the
price is that you're paying at the pump
if you're paying less than you paid a
year or two ago why then the strategy's
working but you're paying more when the
president took office the price of
gasoline here in nassau county was about
a buck 86 a gallon now it's four bucks a
gallon price of electricity is up if the
energy policies are working you're going
to see the cost of energy come down i
will fight to create more energy in this
country to get america energy secure and
part of that is bringing in a pipeline
of oil from canada taking advantage of
the oil and coal we have here drilling
offshore in alaska drilling offshore and
virginia where the people want it those
things will get us the energy we need
mr president could you address because
we did finally get to gas prices here
could you address what the governor said
which is if your energy policy was
working the price of gasoline would not
be $4 a gallon well what the governor
think about what the governor just said
he said when i took office the price of
gasoline was 180 186 why is that because
the economy was on the verge of collapse
because we were about to go through the
worst recession since the great
depression as a consequence of some of
the same policies the governor romney is
now promoted so it's conceivable that
governor romney could bring down gas
prices because with his policies we
might be back in that same mess what i
want to do is to create an economy that
is strong and at the same time produce
energy and with respect to this pipeline
that governor romney keeps on talking
about we've created we've built enough
pipeline to wrap around the entire earth
once so i'm all for pipelines i'm all
for oil production what i'm not for is
us ignoring the other half of the
equation so for example on wind energy
when governor romney says these are
imaginary jobs when you've got thousands
of people right now in iowa right now in
colorado who are working creating wind
power with good-paying manufacturing
jobs and the republican senator and
that's in iowa is all for it providing
tax credits to help this work and
governor romney says i'm opposed i'd get
rid of it that's not an energy strategy
for the future and we need to win that
future and i intend win it as president
i got it i got it move on even the first
question yes you yes you got the first
question so i get the last question last
answer i'm not only in the follow-up it
doesn't quite work
i'm gonna give you a chance here i
promise you i'm going to and the next
question is for you so if you want to
you know continue on but i don't want to
keep all these guys sitting here and i
don't have a policy of stopping wind
jobs in iowa and that they're not
phantom jobs they're real jobs
i appreciate wind jobs in iowa and
across our country i appreciate the jobs
in coal and oil and gas i'm gonna make
sure taking advantage of our energy
resources we'll bring back manufacturing
to america we're gonna get through a
very aggressive energy policy three and
a half million more jobs in this country
it's critical to our future gonna move
your buck along to taxes over here and
all these folks that have been waiting
governor this question is for you it
comes from mary paula no falah no sorry
governor romney you have stated that if
you're elected president you would plan
to reduce the tax rates for all the tax
brackets and that you would work with
the congress to eliminate some
deductions in order to make up for the
loss in revenue
concerning the these various deductions
the mortgage deduction via charitable
deductions the child tax credit and also
the what's that other credit the
education credits which are important to
me because i have children in college
what would be your position on those
things which are important to the middle
class thank you very much and let me
tell you you you're absolutely right
about part of that which is i want to
bring the rates down i want to simplify
the tax code and i want to get
middle-income taxpayers to have lower
taxes and the reason i want
taxes is because middle-income taxpayers
have been buried over the past four
years you've seen as middle-income
people in this country incomes go down
$4,300 a family even as gasoline prices
have gone up $2,000 health insurance
premiums of $2,500 food prices up
utility prices up
the middle-income families in america
have been crushed over the last four
so i want to get some relief to
middle-income families that's part
that's part one now how about deductions
because i'm going to bring rates down
across the board for everybody but i'm
gonna limit deductions and exemptions
and credits particularly for people at
the high end because i am not going to
have people to high end pay less than
they're paying now the top 5 percent of
taxpayers will continue to pay 60 of
the income tax the nation collects so
that'll stay the same middle-income
people are going to get a tax break and
so in terms of bringing down deductions
one way of doing that would be to say
everybody gets i'll pick a number twenty
five thousand dollars of deductions and
credits and you can decide which ones to
use your home mortgage interest
deduction charity child tax credit and
so forth you can use those as part of
filling that bucket if you will a
deductions but your rate comes down and
the burden also comes down on you for
one more reason and that is every
middle-income taxpayer no longer will
pay any tax on interest dividends or
capital gains no tax on your savings
that makes life a lot easier if you're
getting interest from a bank if you're
getting a statement from a mutual fund
or any other kind of investment you have
you don't to worry about filing taxes on
that because there be no taxes for
anybody making two hundred thousand
dollars a year and less on your interest
dividends and capital gains why am i
lowering taxes in the middle class
because under the last four years
they've been buried and i want to help
people in the middle class and i will
not i will not under any circumstances
reduce the share that's being paid by
the highest income taxpayers and i will
not under any circumstances increase
taxes in the middle class the
president's spending the president's
borrowing will cause this nation to have
to raise taxes on the american people
not just at the high end a recent study
has shown the people in the middle class
will see four thousand dollars a year
higher taxes as a result of the spending
and borrowing in this administration i
will not let that happen i'll get us on
track to a balanced budget and i'm gonna
reduce the tax burden on middle-income
and what's that gonna do it's gonna help
those families and it's gonna create
incentives to start growing jobs again
in this country thanks coming thank you
my philosophy on taxes has been simple
and that is i want to give middle class
families and folks who are striving to
get in the middle class some relief
because they have been hit hard over the
last decade over the last 15 over the
last 20 years so four years ago i stood
on the stage just like this one actually
was at a town hall and i said i would
cut taxes for middle-class families and
that's what i've done by $3,600 i said i
would cut taxes for small businesses who
are the drivers and engines of growth
and we've cut them 18 times and i want
to continue those tax cuts for
middle-class families and for small
businesses but what i've also said is if
we're serious about reducing the deficit
if this is genuinely a moral obligation
to the next generation then in addition
to some tough spending cuts we've also
got to make sure that the wealthy do a
little bit more so what i've said is
your first $250,000 worth a income no
change and that means 98 of american
families 97 of small businesses they
will not see a tax increase i'm ready to
sign that bill right now the only reason
it's not happening is because governor
romney's allies in congress have held
the 98 percent hostage because they want
tax breaks for the top 2 but what i've
also said is for above 250,000 we can go
back to the tax rates we had when bill
clinton was president we created 23
million new jobs that's part of what
took us from deficits to surplus it will
be good for our economy and it will be
good for job creation now governor
romney has a different philosophy
he was on 60 minutes just two weeks ago
and he was asked is it fair for somebody
like you making 20 million dollars a
year to pay a lower tax rate than a
nurse or a bus driver somebody making
$50,000 a year and he said yes i think
that's fair
honey that he said i think that's what
grows the economy
well i fundamentally disagree with that
i think what grows the economy is when
you get that tax credit that we put in
place for your kids going to college i
think that grows the economy i think
what grows the economy is when we make
sure small businesses are getting a tax
credit for hiring veterans who fought
for our country that grows our economy
so we just have a different theory and
when governor romney stands here after a
year of campaigning when during a
republican primary he stood on stage and
said i'm gonna give tax cuts he didn't
say tax rate cuts he said tax cuts to
everybody including the top one percent
you should believe him because that's
been his history and that's exactly the
kind of top-down economics that is not
going to work if we want a strong middle
class and an economy that's thriving for
everybody gonna romney i'm sure you've
got a reply there
you're absolutely right you heard what i
said about my tax plan the top 5 will
continue to pay 60 as they do today i'm
not looking to cut taxes for wealthy
people i am looking to cut taxes for
middle income people and why do i want
to bring rates down and at the same time
lowered exemptions and deductions
particularly for people at the high end
because if you bring rates down it makes
it easier for small business to keep
more of their capital and hire people
and for me this is about jobs i want to
get america's economy going again 54 of
america's workers work in businesses
that are taxed as individuals so when
you bring those rates down those small
businesses are able to keep more money
and hire more people for me i look at
what's happened in the last four years
and say this has been a disappointment
we can do better than this
we don't have to settle for how many
months 43 months with unemployment above
8 23 million americans struggling to
find a good job right now there's three
and a half million more women living in
poverty today the one the president took
office we don't have to live like this
we can get this economy going again
my five-point plan does it energy
independence for north america in five
years opening up more trade particularly
in latin america cracking down on china
when they cheat getting just a balanced
budget fixing our training programs for
our workers and finally championing
small business i want to help small
businesses grow and thrive i know how to
make that happen i spent my life in the
private sector i know why jobs come and
why they go and they're going now
because of the policies of this
administration governor let me ask the
president something about what you just
said the the governor says that he is
not going to allow the top 5 leave was
what he said to have a tax cut that it
will all even out that what he wants to
do is give that tax cut to the middle
class settled no it's not settled look
the cost of lowering rates for everybody
across the board 20
along with what he also wants to do in
terms of eliminating the estate tax
along what he wants to do in terms of
corporates changes in the tax code it
costs about five trillion dollars
governor romney then also wants to spend
two trillion dollars on additional
military programs even though the
military is not asking for that's seven
trillion dollars he also wants to
continue the bush tax cuts for the
wealthiest americans
that's another trillion dollars that's
eight trillion dollars now what he says
is he's going to make sure that this
doesn't add to the deficit and he's
going to cut middle-class taxes but when
he's asked how are you going to do it
which deductions which loopholes are you
going to close he can't tell you the the
fact that he only has to pay 14 on his
taxes when a lot of you are paying much
higher you know he's already taken that
off the board capital gains are gonna
continue to be at a low rate so we're
not gonna get money that way we haven't
heard from the governor any specifics
beyond big bird and eliminating funding
for planned parenthood in terms of how
he pays for that now governor romney was
a very successful investor if somebody
came to you governor with a plan that
said here i want to spend seven or eight
trillion dollars and then we're gonna
pay for it but we can't tell you until
maybe after the election how we're gonna
do it you wouldn't have taken such a
sketchy deal and neither should you
the american people because the math
doesn't add up and and what's at stake
here is one of two things either candy
this blows up the deficit because keep
in mind this is just to pay for the
additional spending that he's talking
about seven eight trillion dollars
that's before we even get to the depths
that we already have or alternatively
it's got to be paid for not only by
closing deductions for wealthy
individuals that that'll pay for about
four percent reduction in tax rates
you're going to be paying for it you'll
lose some deductions and you can't buy
this sales
nobody who's looked at it that serious
actually believes it adds up mr
president let me get let me get the
governor in on this in governor let's
before we get into a vast array of who
says what study says what if it
shouldn't add up if somehow when you get
in there there isn't enough tax revenue
coming in if somehow the numbers don't
add up would you be willing to look
again at a 20 of course they add up i i
was i was someone who ran businesses for
25 years and balanced the budget
i ran the olympics and balanced the
budget i ran the the state of
massachusetts as a governor did the
extent any governor does and balanced
the budget all four years when we're
talking about math that doesn't add up
how about four trillion dollars of
deficits over the last four years five
trillion that's math that doesn't add up
we have we we have a president talking
about someone's plan in a way that's
completely foreign to what my real plan
is and then we have his own record which
is we have four consecutive years where
he said when he was running for office
he would cut the deficit in half instead
he's doubled it
we've gone from ten trillion dollars of
national debt to sixteen trillion
dollars of national debt if the
president were reelected we go to almost
20 trillion dollars of national debt
this puts us on a road to greece i know
what it takes to balance budgets i've
done it my entire life so for instance
when he says yours is the five trillion
dollar cut well no it's not because i'm
offsetting some of the reductions
withholding down some of the deductions
stakes here i understand both of you but
i will get run out and i just described
to you precisely how i do i witness with
a single number that people can put and
they can put their their their
deductions and credits and mr president
the next question is they same thing and
it's katherine fenton who has a question
for you
in what new ways do you intend to
rectify the inequalities in the
workplace specifically regarding females
making only 72 percent of what their
male counterparts earn okay there's a
great question and you know i was raised
by a single mom who had to put herself
through school while looking after two
kids and she worked hard every day and
made a lot of sacrifices to make sure we
got everything we need
my grandmother she started off as a
secretary in a bank she never got
college education even though she was
smart as a whip and she worked her way
up to become a vice president at a local
bank but she hit the glass ceiling she
trained people who would end up becoming
her bosses during the course of her
career she didn't complain that's not
what you did in that generation and this
is one of the reasons why one of the
first the first bill i signed was
something called the lily ledbetter bill
and this is named after this amazing
woman who had been doing the same job as
a man for years found out that she was
getting paid less and the supreme court
said that she couldn't bring suit
because she should have found out about
earlier we had no way of finding out
about it so we fixed that and that's an
example of the kind of advocacy that we
need because women are increasingly the
breadwinners in the family this is not
just a women's issue this is a family
issue there's a middle class issue and
that's why we've got to fight for it
also means that we've got to make sure
that young people like yourself are able
to afford a college education earlier
governor romney talked about he wants to
make pell grants and other education
accessible for young people well the
truth of the matter is is that that's
exactly what we've done we've expanded
pell grants for millions of people
including millions of young women all
across the country
we did it by taking sixty billion
dollars that was going to banks and
lenders as middlemen for the student
loan program
and we said let's just cut out the
middleman let's give the money directly
to students and as a consequence we've
seen millions of young people be able to
afford college and that's going to make
sure that young women are going to be
able to compete in that marketplace but
we've got to enforce the laws which is
what we are doing and we've also got to
make sure that in every walk of life we
do not tolerate discrimination that's
been one of the hallmarks of my
administration i'm gonna continue to
push on this issue for the next four
years go to romney pay equity for women
thank you and important topic and one
which i learned a great deal about
particularly as i was serving as
governor of my state because i had the
chance to pull together a cabinet and
all the applicants seem to be men and
and i went to my staff and i said how
come all the people for these jobs are
all men they said well these are the
people that have the qualifications and
i said well gosh can't we can't we find
some some women that are also qualified
and and so we we took a concerted effort
to go out and find women who had
backgrounds that could be qualified to
become members of our cabinet i went to
a number of women's groups and said can
you help us find folks and they brought
us whole binders full of women i was
proud of the fact that after i staffed
my cabinet and my senior staff at the
university of new york in albany did a
survey of all 50 states and concluded
that mine had more women in senior
leadership positions than any of the
state in america now one of the reasons
i was able to get so many good women to
be part of that team was because of our
recruiting effort but number two because
i recognize that if you're going to have
women in the workforce that sometimes
they need to be more flexible my chief
of staff for instance i had two kids
that were still in school she said i
can't be here until 7 or 8 o'clock at
night i need to be able to get home at 5
o'clock so i can be there for making
dinner for my kids and being with them
when they get home for school so we said
fine let's have a flexible schedule so
you can have hours that work for you
we're gonna have to have employers in
the new economy in the economy i'm going
to bring it to play that are gonna be so
anxious to get good workers they're
gonna be anxious to hire women in the in
the last four years women have lost five
hundred and eighty thousand jobs
that's the net if what's happened in the
last four years we're still down five
hundred eighty thousand jobs i mentioned
three and a half million women more now
in poverty than four years ago what we
can do to help young women and women of
all ages is to have a strong economy so
strong that employers are looking to
find good employees and bringing them
into their workforce and adapting to a
flegrei flexible work schedule that
gives women the opportunities that that
they would otherwise not be able to
afford that this is what i've done it's
what i look forward to doing and i know
what it takes to make an economy work
and i know what a working economy looks
like an economy with 7.8 percent
unemployment is not a real strong
economy an economy that that has 23
million people looking for work is not a
strong economy an economy with with 50
of kids graduating from college that
can't find a job or a college-level job
that's that we have to have i mean help
women in america get what get good work
by getting a stronger economy and by
supporting women in the workforce mr
president why don't you get in on this
quickly please
katherine i just want to point out that
when governor romney's campaign was
asked about the lilly ledbetter bill
whether he supported it he said i'll get
back to you and that's not the kind of
advocacy the women need in any economy
now there's some other issues that have
a bearing on how women succeed in the
workplace for example their health care
you know a major difference in this
campaign is that governor romney feels
comfortable having politicians in
washington decide the health care
choices that women are making i think
that's a mistake in my health care bill
i said insurance companies need to
provide contraceptive coverage to
everybody who's insured because this is
not just a health issue it's an economic
issue for women it makes a difference
this is money out of that family's
pocket governor romney not only opposed
it he suggested that in fact employers
should be able to make the decision as
to whether
or not a woman gets contraception
through her insurance coverage that's
not the kind of advocacy that women need
when governor romney says that we should
eliminate funding for planned parenthood
there are millions of women all across
the country who rely on planned
parenthood for not just contraceptive
care they rely on it for mammograms for
cervical cancer screenings that's a
pocketbook issue for women and families
all across the country and it makes a
difference in terms of how well and
effectively women are able to work when
we talk about child care and the credits
that we're providing that makes a
difference in terms of whether they can
go out there and earn a living for their
family these are not just women's issues
these are family issues these are
economic issues and one of the things
that makes us grow as an economy is when
everybody participates and women are
getting the same fair deal as men are
and i've got two daughters and i want to
make sure that they have the same
opportunities that anybody's sons have
that's part of what i'm fighting for is
president the united states i want to
move us along here to susan katz who has
a question and governor it's for you
governor romney i am an undecided voter
because i'm disappointed with the lack
of progress i've seen in the last four
however i do attribute much of america's
economic and international problems to
the failings and missteps of the bush
administration since both you and
president bush are republicans i fear a
return to the policies of those years
should you win this election what is the
biggest difference between you and
george w bush and how do you
differentiate yourself from george w
bush great thank you and i appreciate
that question i just want to make sure
that i think i was supposed to get that
last answer but i want to point out that
i don't believe i don't believe sure our
timekeepers are
the timekeepers are all working and let
me tell you that the last part there's
it's it's for the two of you to talk to
one another and there isn't quite as
orders or you think but go ahead and use
this two minutes anyway you'd like to
the go the question is on the floor
iii just note that i don't believe that
bureaucrats in washington should tell
someone whether they can use
contraceptives or not and i don't
believe employers should tell someone
whether they could have contraceptive
care or not every woman in america
should have access to contraceptives and
at the end the president's statement of
my policy is completely and totally
wrong let me come back and and answer
your question the president bush and i
are different people and these are
different times and that's why my
five-point plan is so different than
what he would have done i mean for
instance we can now by virtue of new
technology actually get all the energy
we need in north america without having
to go to the the arabs of the
venezuelans or anyone else that wasn't
true in this time that's why my policy
starts with a very robust policy to get
all that energy in north america i
become energy secure number two trade
i'll crack down in china president bush
didn't i'm also going to dramatically
expand trade in latin america it's been
growing about 12 per year over a long
period of time i want to add more free
trade agreements so we have more trade
number three i'm gonna get us to a
balanced budget president bush didn't
president obama was right he said that
that was outrageous to have deficits as
high as half a trillion dollars under
the bush years he was right but then he
put in place deficits twice that size
for every one of his four years and his
forecast for the next four years is more
deficits almost that large so that's the
next area i'm different than president
bush and then let's take the last one
championing small business our party has
been focused on big business too long
i came through small business i
understand how hard it is to start a
small business
that's why everything i'll do is
designed to help small businesses grow
and add jobs i want to keep their taxes
down on small business i want regulators
to see their job as encouraging small
enterprise not crushing it and the thing
i find most troubling about obamacare
well it's a long list but one of the
things i find most troubling is
that when you go on and talk to small
businesses and ask them what they think
about it they tell you it keeps them
from hiring more people my priority is
jobs i know how to make that happen and
president bush had a very different path
for a very different time my path is
designed in getting small businesses to
grow and harpy's well first of all i
think it's important to tell you that we
did come in during some tough times we
were losing 800,000 jobs a month when i
started but we had been digging our way
out of policies that were misplaced and
focused on the top doing very well and
middle-class folks not doing well and
we've seen 30 consecutive 31 consecutive
months of job growth 5.2 million new
jobs created and the plans that i talked
about will create even more but when
governor romney says that he has very
different economic plan the centerpiece
of his economic plan are tax cuts that's
what took us from surplus to deficit
when he talks about getting tough on
china i keep in mind that governor
romney invested in companies that were
pioneers about sourcing to china and is
currently investing in countries in
companies that are building surveillance
equipment for china to spy on its own
folks that's governor you're the last
person who's going to get tough on china
and what we've done when it comes to
trade is not only sign three trade deals
to open up new markets but we've also
set up a task force for trade that goes
after anybody who is taking advantage of
american workers or businesses not
creating a level playing field we've
brought twice as many cases against
unfair trading practices than the
previous administration and we've won
every single one that's been decided
when i said that we had to make sure
that china was not flooding our domestic
market with cheap tires governor romney
said i was being protectionist that it
wouldn't be helpful to american workers
well in fact we saved a thousand jobs
and that's the kind of tough trade
actions that are required but the last
point i want to make is this you know
there are some things where governor
romney is different from george bush
yeah george bush didn't propose turning
medicare into a voucher george bush
embraced comprehensive immigration
reform he didn't call for self
deportation george bush never suggested
that we eliminate funding for planned
parenthood so there are differences
between governor romney and george bush
but they're not on economic policy in
some ways he's gone to a more extreme
barkhaa to me for i want to move you
both along to the next question because
it's in the same wheelhouse so you you
will be able to respond but the
president does get this question i want
to call on michael jones mr president i
voted for you in 2008 what have you done
or accomplished to earn my vote in 2012
i'm not that optimistic as i was in 2012
most things i need for everyday living
are very expensive well we've gone
through a tough four years there's no
doubt about but four years ago i told
the american people and i told you i
would cut taxes for middle class
families and i did i told you i'd cut
taxes for small businesses and i have i
said that i'd end the war in iraq and i
did i said we'd refocus attention on
those who actually attacked us on 9/11
and we have gone after al qaeda's
leadership like never before and osama
bin laden is dead i said that we would
put in place health care reform to make
sure that insurance companies can't jerk
you around and if you don't have health
insurance that you'd have a chance to
get affordable insurance and i have i
committed that i would rein in the
excesses of wall street and we passed
the toughest wall street reforms since
the 1930s we've created 5 million jobs
gone from 800,000 jobs a month being
lost and we are making progress we saved
an auto industry that was on the brink
of collapse now does that mean you're
not struggling absolutely not a lot of
us are and that's why the plan that i've
put forward for manufacturing and
education and reducing our deficit in a
sensible way using the savings from
ending wars to rebuild america and
putting people back to work making sure
that we are controlling our own energy
but not just the energy of today but
also the energy of the future all those
things will make a difference so the
point is the commitments i've made i've
kept and those that i haven't been able
to keep it's not for lack of trying and
we're going to get it done in a second
term but you should pay attention to
this camp
because governor romney's made some
commitments as well and i suspect he'll
keep those two now when members of the
republican congress say we're gonna sign
a no tack pledge so that we don't ask a
dime from millionaires millions to
reduce our deficit so we can still
invest in education and helping kids go
to college he said me too when they said
we're gonna cut planned parenthood
funding he said me too when he said
we're gonna repeal obama care first
thing i'm gonna do despite the fact that
it's the same health care plan that he
passed in massachusetts and is working
he said me too that is not the kind of
leadership that you need but you should
expect that those are promises he's
going to keep boys the election is going
to be whose promises are going to be
more likely to help you in your life
make sure your kids can go to college
make sure that you are getting a
good-paying job making sure that
medicare and social security will be
there thank you governor i think you
know better i think you know that these
last four years haven't been so good as
the president just described and that
you don't feel like you're confident
that the next four years gonna be much
better either i can tell you that if you
were to elect president obama you know
what you're gonna get you're gonna get a
repeat of the last four years we just
can't afford four more years like the
last four years he said that by now we'd
have unemployment at five point four
percent the difference between where it
is and five point four percent is nine
million americans without work i wasn't
the one that said five point four
percent this was the president's plan
didn't get there he said he would have
by now put forward a plan to reform
medicare and social security because he
pointed out there on the road to
bankruptcy he would reform them he'd get
that done he hasn't even made a proposal
on either one he said in his first year
he'd put out an immigration plan that
would deal with her immigration
challenges didn't even file it this is a
president who has not been able to do
what he said he'd do he said that he'd
cut in half the deficit
he hasn't done that either in fact he
doubled it he said that by now
middle-income families would have a
reduction in their health insurance
premiums by $2,500 care is passed or
implemented it's already been passed if
it's implemented fully it'll be another
2,500 on top the middle class is getting
crushed under the policies of a
president who has not understood what it
takes to get the economy working again
he keeps saying look how created five
million jobs that's after losing five
million jobs the entire record is such
that the unemployment has not been
reduced in this country the unemployment
the number of people who are still
looking for work is still 23 million
americans there are more people in
poverty one of the six people in poverty
how about food stamps when he took
office 32 million people were on food
stamps today 47 million people are in
food stamps how about the growth of the
economy it's growing more slowly this
year than last year and more slowly last
year than the year before the president
wants to do well i understand but the
policies he's put in place from
obamacare to dodd-frank to his tax
policies to his regulatory policies
these policies combined have not led
this economy take off and grow like it
could have you might say well you got an
example of one it works better yeah in
the reagan recession where unemployment
hit ten point eight percent between that
period the end of that recession and
equivalent period of time to today
ronald reagan's recovery created twice
as many jobs is this president's
recovery five million jobs doesn't even
keep up with our population growth and
the only reason the unemployment rate
seems a little lower today is because of
all the people that have dropped out of
the workforce the president has tried
but his policies haven't worked he's
great as a as a as a speaker and and
describing his plans and his vision
that's wonderful except we have a record
to look at and that record shows he just
hasn't been able to cut the deficit to
put in place reforms from medicare and
social security to
serve them to get us the rising incomes
we need meeting incomes down $4,300 a
family and 23 million americans out of
work that's what this election is about
it's about who can get the middle class
in this country a bright and prosperous
future and assure our kids the kind of
hope and optimism they deserve governor
i want to move you along don't don't go
away and we'll have plenty of time
respond we are quite aware of the clock
for both of you but i want to bring in a
different subject here mr president
i'll be right back with you at lorain of
sario has a question for you about a
topic we have not yes for governor
romney and we'll be right with you mr
president thanks what do you plan on
doing with immigrants without their
green cards that are currently living
here as productive members of society
thank you gil arraign did i get that
right good thank you for your question
and let me step back and tell you what
i'd like to do with our immigration
policy broadly and include an answer to
your question first of all this is a
nation of immigrants we welcome people
coming to this country as immigrants my
dad was born in mexico of american
parents ann's dad was born in wales and
as a first-generation american we
welcome legal immigrants into this
i want our legal system to work better i
want it to be streamlined i want it to
be clearer i don't think you have to
shouldn't have to hire a lawyer to
figure out how to get in this country
legally i also think that we should give
visas to people green cards rather the
people who graduate with skills that we
need people around the world with
accredited degrees in in science and
math get a green card stapled to their
diploma come to the us of a we should
make sure that our legal system works
number two we're gonna have to stop
illegal immigration there are four
million people who are waiting in line
to get here legally those who've come
here illegally take their place so i
will not grant amnesty to those who come
here illegally what i will do is i'll
put in place an employment verification
system and make sure that employers that
hire people who have come here illegally
are sanctioned for doing so i won't put
in place magnets for people coming here
galia so for instance i would not give
driver's licenses to those that have
come here illegally as that as the
president would the kids of those that
came here illegally those kids i think
should have a pathway to become a a
permanent resident of the united states
and military service for instance is one
way they would have that kind of pathway
to become a permanent resident now when
the president ran for office he said
that he put in place in his first year a
piece of legislation he'd file a bill in
his first year they would reformer our
immigration system protect legal
immigration stop the illegal immigration
he didn't do it he had a democrat house
and democrat senate super majority in
both houses why did he fail to even
promote legislation that would have
provided an answer for those that want
to come here illegally and for those
that are here illegally today that's a
question i think the the president will
have a chance to answer right now i look
forward to it lorena lorraine we are a
nation of immigrants that may were just
a few miles away from ellis island we
all understand what this country has
become because talent from all around
the world wants to come here people are
willing to take risks people who want to
build on their dreams and make sure
their kids having even bigger dreams
than they have but we're also a nation
of laws so what i've said is we need to
fix a broken immigration system and i've
done everything that i can on my own and
sought cooperation from congress to make
sure that we fix this system first thing
we did was to streamline the legal
immigration system to reduce the backlog
make it easier simpler and cheaper for
people who were waiting in line obeying
the law to make sure that they can come
here and contribute to our country and
that's good for our economic growth
they'll start new businesses they'll
make things happen to create jobs here
in the united states number two we do
have to deal with our border so we put
more border patrol on than any time in
history and the flow of undocumented
workers across the border is actually
lower than it's been in 40 years
also said is if we're gonna go after
folks who are here illegally we should
do it smartly and go after folks who are
criminals gangbangers people who are
hurting the community not after students
not after folks who are here just
because they're trying to figure out how
to feed their families and that's what
we've done and what i've also said is
for young people who come here brought
in here oftentimes by their parents have
gone to school here pledged allegiance
to the flag think of this as their
country understand themselves as
americans in every way except having
papers and we should make sure that we
give them pathway to citizenship and
that's what i've done administratively
now governor romney just said that you
know he wants to help those young people
too but during the republican primary he
said i will veto the dream act that
would allow these young people to have
access his main strategy during the
republican primary was to say we're
gonna encourage self-deportation making
life so miserable on folks that don't
leave he called the arizona law a model
for the nation part of the arizona law
said that law enforcement officers could
stop folks because they suspected maybe
they look like they might be
undocumented workers and check their
papers and you know what if my daughter
or yours looks to somebody like they're
not a citizen i don't want i don't want
to empower somebody like that so we can
fix this system in a comprehensive way
and when governor romney says the
challenge is well obama didn't try
that's not true i sat down with
democrats and republicans at the
beginning of my term and i said let's
fix this system including senators
previously had supported on the
republican side but it's very hard for
republicans in congress to support
comprehensive immigration reform if
their standard bearer has said that this
is not something i'm interested in
supporting let me get the governor in
here mr president let's speak to if you
govenor the idea of self-deportation but
no let me go back and speak to the
points that the president made and and
and let's get them correct i did not say
that the arizona law was a model for the
nation in that aspect i said that the
e-verify portion of the arizona law
which is which is the portion of the law
which says that employers could be able
to determine whether someone is here
illegally or not illegally that that was
a model for the nation that's number one
number two i asked the president a
question i think hispanics and
immigrants all over the nation have
asked he was asked this on univision the
other day why when you said you'd file
legislation in your first year didn't
you do it and he didn't answer he don't
he doesn't answer that question he said
the standard bearer wasn't for it i'm
glad you thought it was a standard
bearer four years ago but i wasn't four
years ago you said in your first year
you would file legislation in his first
year i was just kidding or licking my
wounds from having been beaten by john
mccain all right i was not the standard
bearer my my view is that this president
should have honored his promise to to do
as he said now let me mention one other
thing and that is self-deportation says
let it let people make their own choice
what i was saying is we're not going to
round up 12 million people undocumented
illegals and take them out of the nation
instead let mit people make their own
choice and if they if they find that
that they can't get the benefits here
that they want and they can't find they
can't find the job they want and they'll
make a decision to go a place where they
have better opportunities but i'm not in
favor of rounding up people in and and
taking them out of this country i am in
favor as the president has said and i
agree with him which is that if people
have committed crimes we got to get him
out of this country let me mention
something else the president said it was
a moment ago i didn't get a chance to
when he was describing chinese
investments and so far they see all
these people they've been waiting for
you just give a point any investments i
have over the last eight years have been
managed by a blind trusts and i
understand they do include investments
outside the united states including in
chinese companies
mr president have you looked at your
pension have you looked at your pension
mr president you looked at your pension
you know i don't look at my pension it's
not as big as yours let me give it let
me give you some advice suck at that
often let me give you some advice look
at your pension you also investments in
chinese companies you also have
investments outside the united states
you also have investments through a key
thank you i do want to make sure that we
just understand something
nobody romney says he wasn't referring
to arizona's a model for the nation his
top advisor on immigration is the guy
who designed the arizona law the
entirety of it not a favor fly the whole
thing that's his policy and it's a bad
policy and it won't help us grow look
when we think about immigration we have
to understand there are folks all around
the world who still see america as the
land of promise and they provide us
energy and they provide us innovation
and they start companies like intel and
google and we want to encourage that now
we've got to make sure that we do it in
a smart way in a comprehensive way and
we make the legal system better but when
we make this into a divisive political
issue and when we don't have bipartisan
support i can deliver governor a whole
bunch of democrats to get comprehensive
immigration reform done and i get in
first year at all it's time for them to
get serious on it don't go away because
i mean i want you to talk to kerry ladka
who has it wants to switch a topic for
us okay i'm sorry what's your name it's
kerry kerry lajiye this question
actually comes from a brain trust of my
friends at global telecom supply in
mineola yesterday we were sitting around
talking about libya and we were reading
and became aware of reports
that the state department refused extra
security for our embassy in benghazi
libya prior to the attacks that killed
four americans who was it that denied
enhanced security and why well let me
first of all talk about our diplomats
because they served all around the world
and do an incredible job in a very
dangerous situation and these aren't
just representatives of the united
states they're my representatives i send
them there often times in the harm's way
i know these folks and i know their
families so nobody is more concerned
about their safety and security than i
am so as soon as we found out that the
men gauzy consulate was being overrun i
was on the phone with my national
security team and i gave them three
instructions number one beefed up our
security and say and procedures not just
in libya but in every embassy and
consulate in the region number two
investigate exactly what happened
regardless of where the facts lead us to
make sure that folks are held
accountable and it doesn't happen again
and number three we are gonna find out
who did this and we're gonna hunt them
down because one of the things that i've
said throughout my presidency is when
folks mess with americans we go after
them now
governor romney had a very different
response while we were still dealing
with our diplomats being threatened
governor romney put out a press release
trying to make political points and
that's not how a commander-in-chief
operates you don't turn national
security into a political issue
certainly not right when it's happening
and people not everybody agrees with
some of the decisions i've made when it
comes to our national security i mean
what i say
i said i'd end the war in libya in in
iraq and i did i said that we'd go after
al-qaeda and bin laden we have i said we
transition out of afghanistan and start
making sure that afghans are responsible
for their own security
that's what i'm doing and when it comes
to this issue when i say that we are
gonna find out exactly what happened
everybody will be held accountable and i
am ultimately responsible for what's
taking place there because these are my
folks and i'm the one who has to greet
those coffins when they come home you
know that i mean what i say move us
along governor thank you kerry for your
question it's an important one and and i
i think the president just said
correctly that the des buck does stop at
his desk and and he takes responsibility
for for that for the the failure in
providing those security resources and
and those terrible things may well
happen from time to time i i'm i feel
very deeply sympathetic for the families
of those who lost lost loved ones and
today there's a memorial service for one
of those that was lost in this tragedy
we we think of their families and care
for them deeply there were other issues
associated with this with this tragedy
there were many days that passed before
we knew whether this was a spontaneous
demonstration or actually whether it was
a terrorist attack and there was no
demonstration involved it was a
terrorist attack and it took a long time
for that to be told to the american
people whether there was some misleading
or instead whether we just didn't know
what happened i think you have to ask
yourself why didn't we know five days
later when the ambassador to the united
nations went on tv to say that this was
a demonstration how could we have not
known but but i find more troubling than
this that on the day following the
assassination of the united states
ambassador the first time that's
happened since 1979 when when we have
four americans killed there when
apparently we didn't know what happened
that the president the day after that
happened flies to las vegas for
political fundraiser in the next state
of colorado for another event another
political event i think these these
actions taken by a president and a
leader have symbolic significance and
perhaps even material significance in
that you'd hope that during that time we
could call in the people who were
actually eyewitnesses we've read their
accounts now about what happened it was
very clear this was not a demonstration
this was an
attack by terrorists and and this calls
into question the president's whole
policy in the middle east look what's
happening in syria in egypt now and in
libya consider the distance between
ourselves and israel the president said
that that he was going to put daylight
between us in israel we have iran four
years closer to a nuclear bomb syria
syria is not just the tragedy of thirty
thousand civilians being killed by a
military but also a strategic a
strategically significant player for
america that the president's policies
throughout the middle east began with an
apology tour and and pursue a strategy
of leading from behind and this strategy
is unraveling before our very eyes
because we're close again i want to
still get a lot of people in i want to
ask you something mr president then
have the governor just quickly your
secretary of state as i'm sure you know
has said that she takes full
responsibility for the attack on the
diplomatic mission in benghazi does the
buck stop with your secretary of state
as far as what went on here secretary
clinton has done an extraordinary job
but she works for me i'm the president
and i'm always responsible and that's
why nobody's more interested in finding
out exactly what happened than i did the
day after the attack governor i stood in
the rose garden and i told the american
people in the world that we were gonna
find out exactly what happened that this
was an act of terror and i also said
that we're gonna hunt down those who
committed this crime and then a few days
later i was there greeting the caskets
coming into andrews air force base and
grieving with the families and the
suggestion that anybody in my team or
the secretary of state our un ambassador
anybody on my team would play politics
or mislead when we've lost four of our
own governor is offensive that's not
what we do that's not what i do as
president that's not what i do as
governor to view monitor i think it's
interesting the president just said
something which which is that on the day
after the attack he went the roast
garden and said that this was an act of
terror you said in the rose garden the
day after the attack it was an act of
terror it was not a spontaneous
demonstration is that what you're saying
please proceed governor i want to make
sure we get that for the record because
it took the president 14 days before he
called the attack in benghazi an act of
terror yet the transfer he did in fact
sir so let me let me call it an act he
did call it an act of terror it did as
well take it did as well take two weeks
or so for the whole idea of there being
a riot out there about this tape to come
out you're the administration the
administration indicated that this was a
a reaction to a to a video and was a
spontaneous reaction it took them a long
time to say this was a terrorist act by
a terrorist group and and to suggest am
i incorrect in that regard on sunday the
that your secretary or excuse me
the ambassador the united nations one of
the sunday television shows and spoke
about how this was a spontaneous we're
going to have a chance to get some
questions because what i want to do mr
president stand there for a second
because i want to introduce you to nina
gonzalez who brought up a question that
we hear a lot both over the internet and
from this crowd president obama during
the democratic national convention in
2008 you stated you wanted to keep
ak-47s out of the hands of criminals
what has your administration done or
planned to do to limit the availability
of assault weapons a we're a nation that
believes in the second amendment and i
believe in the second amendment
we've got a long tradition of hunting
and sportsmen and people who want to
make sure they can protect themselves
but there have been too many instances
during the course of my presidency where
i've had to comfort families who've lost
somebody most recently out in aurora you
know just a couple of weeks ago actually
probably about a month i saw a mother
who i had met at the bedside of her son
who had been shot in that theater and
her son had been shot through the head
and we spent some time and we said a
prayer and remarkably about two months
later this young man and his mom showed
up and he looked unbelievable good as
but there were a lot of families who
didn't have that good fortune and whose
sons or daughters or husbands didn't
survive so my belief is that a we have
to enforce the laws we've already got
make sure that we're keeping guns out of
the hands of criminals those who are
mentally ill we've done a much better
job in terms of background checks but
we've got more to do when it comes to
enforcement but i also share your belief
that weapons that were designed for
soldiers in war theaters don't belong on
our streets and so what i'm trying to do
is to get a broader conversation about
how do we reduce the violence generally
part of it is seeing if we can get an
assault weapons ban reintroduced but
part of it is also looking at other
sources of the violence because frankly
in my hometown of chicago there's an
awful lot of violence and they're not
using ak-47s they're using cheap
handguns and so what can we do to
intervene to make sure that young people
have opportunity that our schools are
working that if there's violence on the
streets that working with faith groups
and law enforcement we can catch it
before it gets out of control and so
what i want is a is
a comprehensive strategy part of it is
seeing if we can get automatic weapons
that kill folks in amazing numbers out
of the hands of criminals and the
mentally ill but part of it is also
going deeper and seeing if we can get
into these communities and making sure
we catch violent impulses before they
occur yeah i i'm not in favor of new
pieces of legislation on on guns and and
taking guns away or making certain guns
illegal we of course don't want to have
automatic weapons and that's already
illegal in this country to have
automatic weapons what i believe is we
have to do as the president mentioned
towards the end of his remarks there
which is to make enormous efforts to
enforce the gun laws that we have and to
change the culture of violence we have
and you asked how are we going to do
that and there are a number of things he
mentioned good schools i totally agree
we were able to drive our schools to be
number one in the nation in my state and
i believe if we do a better job in
education we'll we'll give people the
the hope and opportunity they deserve
and perhaps less violence from that but
let me mention another thing and that is
parents we need moms and dads helping
raise kids wherever possible that the
benefit of having two parents in the
home and that's not always possible a
lot of great single moms single dads but
gosh to tell our kids that before they
have babies they ought to think about
getting married to someone that's a
great idea because if there's a
two-parent family the prospect of living
in poverty goes down dramatically the
opportunities that the child will will
be able to achieve increased
dramatically so we can make changes in
the way our culture works to help bring
people away from violence and give them
opportunity and bring them in the
american system the one the greatest
failure we've had with regards to gun
violence in some respects is what what
is known as fast and furious which was a
program under this administration and
how it worked exactly i think we don't
know precisely but where thousands of
automatic and ak-47 type weapons were
were given to people that ultimately
gave them to drug lords they used those
weapons against against their own
citizens and killed americans with them
and this was a
this was a program of the government for
what purpose it was put in place i can't
imagine but it's one of the great
tragedies related to violence in our
society which has occurred during this
administration which i think the
american people would like to understand
fully it's been investigated to a degree
but but the administration has as a as
carried out executive privilege to
prevent all the information from coming
out i'd like to understand who it was
that did this what the idea was behind
it why it led to the violence thousands
of guns going to mexican drug lords
governor if i could the question was
about these assault weapons that once
were banned and are no longer banned i
know that you signed a salt weapons ban
when you were in massachusetts obviously
with this question you no longer do
support that why is that given the kind
of violence that we see sometimes with
these mass killings i weigh is that that
you've changed your mind well candy
actually in my state the pro-gun folks
and the anti-gun folks came together and
put together a piece of legislation and
and it's referred to as a as the ed
assault weapon ban but it had at the
signing of the bill
both the pro-gun and the anti-gun people
came together because it provided
opportunities for both that both wanted
there were hunting opportunities for
instance that hadn't previously been
available and so forth so it was a
mutually agreed upon piece of
legislation that's what we need more of
candy what we have right now in
washington is a place that's that's
gridlocked we have all right we haven't
we haven't had the leadership in
washington to work at a bipartisan basis
i was able to do that in my state and
bring these two together the first of
all i think governor romney was for an
assault weapons ban before he was
against it and he said that the reason
he changed his mind was in part because
he was seeking the endorsement the
national rifle association so that's on
the record but i think that one area we
agree on is the importance of parents
and the importance of schools because i
do believe that if our young people have
opportunity then they're less likely to
engage in these kinds of violent acts
we're not gonna eliminate everybody who
is mentally disturbed and we've got to
make sure that they don't get weapons
but we can make a difference in terms of
ensuring that every young person in
america regardless of where they come
from what they look like have a chance
to succeed in candy we haven't had a
chance to talk about education much but
i think it is very important to
understand that the reforms we've put in
place working with 46 governor's around
the country are seeing schools that are
some of the ones that are the toughest
for kids starting to succeed we're
starting to see gains in math and
science when it comes to community
colleges we are setting up programs
including with nassau community college
to retrain workers including young
people who may have dropped out of
school but now are getting another
chance training them for the jobs that
exist right now
and in fact employers are looking for
skilled workers and so we're matching
them up giving them access to higher
education as i said we have made sure
that millions of young people are able
to get education that they weren't able
to get before now mr president i have
to i have to move you along here just
one second why is it because this is
important this is part of the choice in
this election and when governor romney
was asked whether teachers hiring more
teachers was important to growing our
economy governor romney said that
doesn't grow our economy here so i need
to move our customers guns so let me let
me this will make in terms of whether or
not we can move this economy forward for
these young i understand and reduce our
violence okay thank you so much i want
to ask carol goldberg to stand up
because she gets to a question that both
these men had been passion about for
governor romney the outsourcing of
american jobs overseas has taken a toll
on our economy what plans do you have to
put back and keep jobs here in the
united states a great question an
important question because your absolute
right at the place where we've seen
manufacturing go has been china
china is now the largest manufacturer in
the world used to be
the united states of america a lot of
good people have lost jobs a half a
million manufacturing jobs have been
lost in the last four years that's total
over the last four years one of the
reasons for that is that people think
it's more attractive in some cases to go
offshore than than to stay here we have
made it less attractive for enterprises
to stay here than to go offshore from
time to time what i will do as president
is make sure it's more attractive to
come to america again this is the way
we're going to create jobs in this
country it's not by trickle-down
government saying we're gonna take more
money from people and hire more
government workers raise more taxes put
in place more regulations trickle-down
government has never worked here he's
never worked anywhere i want to make
america the most attractive place in the
world for entrepreneurs for small
business for big business to invest in
grow in america now we're going to have
to make sure that as we trade with other
nations that they play by the rules and
china hasn't one of the reasons are one
of the ways they don't play by the rules
is artificially holding down the value
their currency because if they put their
currency down low that means their
prices and their goods are low and that
makes them advantageous in the
marketplace we lose sales and
manufacturers here in the us making the
same products can't compete china has
been a currency manipulator for years
and years and years and the president
has a regular opportunity to to label
them as a as a currency manipulator but
refuses to do so on day one i will label
china a currency manipulator which will
allow me as president to be able to put
in place if necessary terrace where i
believe that they are taking unfair
advantage of our manufacturers so we're
going to make sure that people we trade
with around the world play by the rules
but let me let me not just stop there
don't forget what's key to bringing back
jobs here is not just finding someone
else to punish and and i'm gonna be
strict for people who we trade with to
make sure they they follow the law and
play by the rules but it's also to make
america i'm not the most attractive
place in the world for businesses of all
kinds that's why i want to bring down
the tax rates on small employers big
employers so they want to be here
canada's tax rate on companies is now 15
percent ours is 35 percent so if you're
starting a business where would you
rather start it we have to be
competitive if we're gonna create more
jobs here regulations have quadrupled
the rate of regulations quadrupled under
this president
i talked to small businesses across the
country they say we feel like we're
under attack from our own government i
want to make sure that regulators see
their job is encouraging small business
not crushing it and there's no question
but that obamacare has been an
extraordinary deterrent to enterprises
of all kinds hiring people my priority
is making sure that we get more people
hired if we have more people hired if we
get back manufacturing jobs if we get
back all kinds of jobs into this country
then you're gonna see rising incomes
again the reason incomes are down is
because unemployment is so high i know
what it takes to get this to happen and
my plan will do that and one part of it
is to make sure that we keep china
playing by the rules mr president in
two minutes here because we are then
gonna go to our last question okay we
need to create jobs here and both
governor romney and i agree actually
that we should lower our corporate tax
rate it's too high but there's a
difference in terms of how we would do
it i want to close loopholes that allow
companies to deduct expenses when they
move to china that allow them to profit
offshore and not have to get taxed so
they have tax advantages offshore all
those changes in our tax code would make
a difference now governor romney
actually wants to expand those tax
breaks one of his big ideas when it
comes to corporate tax reform would be
to say if you invest overseas you make
profits overseas you don't have to pay
to the us taxes but of course if you're
a small business or a mom-and-pop
business or a big business starting up
here you've got to pay even the reduced
rate the governor romney's talking about
and it's estimated that that will create
800,000 new jobs problem is they'll be
in china or india or germany
that's not the way we're going to create
jobs here the way we're going to create
jobs here is not just to change our tax
code but also to double our exports and
we are on pace to double our exports one
of the commitments i made when i was
president that's creating tens of
thousands of jobs all across the country
that's why we've kept on pushing trade
deals but trade deals that make sure
that american workers and american
businesses are getting a good deal now
governor romney talked about china as i
already indicated in the private sector
governor romney's company invested in
what were called pioneers of outsourcing
that's not my phrase that's what
reporters called it and as far as
currency manipulation the currency has
actually gone up 11 percent since i've
been president because we have pushed
them hard and we've put unprecedented
trade pressure on china
that's why exports have significantly
increased under my presidency that's
going to help to create jobs here mr
president we have a really short time
for a quick discussion here i've had the
mac's the iphones they are all
manufactured in china one of the major
reasons is labor is so much cheaper here
how do you convince a great american
company to bring that manufacturing back
here the answer is very straightforward
we can compete with anyone in the world
as long as the playing field is level
china's been cheating over the years won
by holding down the value their currency
number two by stealing our intellectual
property our designs our patents our
technology there's even an apple store
in china that's a counterfeit apple
store selling counterfeit goods they
hack into our computers we will have to
have people play on a fair basis that's
number one
number two we have to make america the
most attractive place for entrepreneurs
for people who want to expand a business
that's what brings jobs in the
president's characterization of my tax
planner as complete is completely it's
completely false
let me tell you let me go to the
president here because we really are
running out of time and the question is
can we ever get we can't get wages like
that it can't be sustained andy there's
some jobs that are not going to come
back because they're low
age low-skill jobs i want high-wage
high-skill jobs that's why we have to
emphasize manufacturing that's why we
have to invest in advanced manufacturing
that's why we've got to make sure that
we've got the best science and research
in the world and when we talk about
deficits if we're adding to our deficit
for tax cuts for folks who don't need
them and we're cutting investments in
research and science that will create
the next app create the next new
innovation that will sell products
around the world
we will lose that race if we're not
training engineers to make sure that
they are equipped here in this country
then companies won't come here those
investments are what's going to help to
make sure that we continue to lead this
world economy not just next year but 10
years from now 50 years from now jobs
government jobs i want to introduce you
to barry green because he's gonna have
the last question to you first i think
this is a tough question each of you
what do you believe is the biggest
misperception that the american people
have about you as a man and a candidate
using specific examples can you take
this opportunity to debunk that
misperception and set us straight thank
you and that's an opportunity for me and
i appreciate it
in the nature of a campaign it seems
that some campaigns are focused on
attacking a person rather than
prescribing their own future and the
things they'd like to do in the course
of that i think the president's campaign
has tried to characterize me as as
someone who is very different to who i
am i care about a hundred percent of the
american people i want a hundred percent
of the american people have a bright and
prosperous future i care about our kids
i understand what it takes two to make a
bright and prosperous future for america
again i spent my life in the private
sector not in government i'm a guy who
wants to help with the experience i have
the american people my my passion
probably flows from the fact that i
believe in god
and i believe we're all children of the
same god i believe we have a
responsibility to care for one another
aye aye sir vaz a missionary for my
church served as a pastor in my
congregation for about 10 years
i've sat across the table from people
who are were out of work and worked with
them to try and find new worker to help
them through tough times i went to the
olympics when they were in trouble to
try and get them on track and as
governor of my state i was able to get a
hundred percent of my people in short
all my kids about 90 percent of the
adults was able also to get our schools
ranked number one in the nation so a
hundred percent of our kids that have a
bright opportunity for a future i
understand that i can get this country
on track again we don't have to settle
for what we're going through we don't
have to settle for gasoline at four
bucks we don't have to settle for
unemployment at a chronically high level
we don't have to settle for 47 million
people on food stamps we don't just
settle for 50 percent of kids coming out
of college not able to get work we don't
don't--i settle for 23 million people
struggling to find a good job if i
become president i'll get america
working again i will get us on track to
a balanced budget the president hasn't i
will i'll make sure we can reform
medicare and social security to preserve
them for coming coming generations the
president said he would
he didn't i'll get our incomes up and by
the way i've done these things i served
as a governor and showed i could get
them done mr president last two minutes
belong to you barry i think a lot of
this campaign maybe over the last four
years has been devoted to this notion
that i think government creates jobs
that that somehow is the answer that's
not what i believe i believe that the
free enterprise system is the greatest
engine of prosperity the world's ever
known i believe in self-reliance and
individual initiative and risk-takers
being rewarded but i also believe that
everybody should have a fair shot and
everybody should do their fair share and
everybody should play by the same rules
because that's how our economy is grown
that's how we built the world's greatest
middle class
oh and and that is part of what's at
stake in this election there's a
fundamentally different vision about how
we move our country forward
i believe governor romney is a good man
loves his family cares about his faith
but i also believe that when he said but
behind closed doors that 47 of the
country considered themselves victims
who refused personal responsibility
think about who he was talking about
folks on social security who've worked
all their lives
veterans who sacrificed for this country
students who are out there trying to
hopefully advance their own dreams but
also this country's dreams soldiers who
overseas fighting for us right now
people who are working hard every day
paying payroll tax gas taxes but don't
make enough income and i want to fight
for them that's what i've been doing for
the last four years because if they
succeed i believe the country succeeds
when my grandfather fought in world war
two and he came back and he got a gi
bill and that allowed him to go to
that wasn't a handout that was something
that advanced the entire country and i
want to make sure that the next
generation has those same opportunities
that's why i'm asking for your vote and
that's why i'm asking for another four
years president obama
governor romney thank you for being here
tonight on that note we have come to an
end of this town hall debate our thanks
to the participants for their time and
to the people of hofstra university for
their hospitality the next and final
debate takes place monday night at lynn
university in both overtime florida
don't forget to watch election day is
three weeks from today don't forget to
vote good night
welcome back the town hall debate has
just wrapped up and we've got a lot of
analysis ahead